---
slug: "what-devops-means-to-me"
title: "What \"Devops\" Means to Me"
date: 2019-10-11
tags: [tech]
draft: false
---

Many people have different definitions to what "Devops" means.
I've gotten a chance to work with teams that embed devops into their
practices, and here's my take on it.


First off, some backstory. A long time ago, there was a software
development process called "waterfall". The main idea is that each
team completed their tasks and passed the software on to the next team.
It was sequential. The developement team would build the application,
then they would give it to the deployment team to put it into production.
This was all done with minimal communication. When issues occured in the
application, the blame game was set in motion.

The deployment team blames developers code for not meeting standards,
and developers blame deployment for not catering to their code. The
software jumps back and forth.

Some issues that can happen:
- specific versions of modules needed to be installed but was not
documented for deployment team
- environments are not reproducible because undocumented processes were
used to create them
- new release of code was not backwards compatible with other software
that was using it
- the code was not built to scale to higher degrees of users

And so, havoc was ensued, timelines were pushed, and customers never got
their software.


Fast forward to today, everyone talks about "agile software development".
The agile methodology centers around being on your toes and being suseptible to change.
Devops, is a spawn from the gile methodology. An amalgamation of "developers"
and "operations", where one person or team is thinking about both
together. It says that when the software is created, it should be thinking
about operations and being production-ready at the start of writing code.
Developers ensure that their software dependencies are laid out, their environments are
reproducible, and that the integrations with other software are working
correctly. To make things easier, Each commit to the software
runs a suite of testing that ensures that at every step, the software
can still be easily deployed to customers. This type of testing is called
continuous integration. Developers get continual fast feedback on their
latest code changes, instead of waiting for months for another team to
show them. The faster this feedback the developers have, the easier it is
for them to fix issues. By deploying regularly to production-like systems,
it becomes easier to release when it's time to deliver to stakeholders. Being
able to continually deliver features without being blocked by release
issues is called Continuous Delivery. The barrier between developers and
operations is removed and software delivery is much faster.


So that's my take on Devops. It's not in the tools, it's not a team
that's solely devoted "Devops", it's a software development mindset.
A mindset where your code is rigorously tested all
the time, where communication is key, and where you are capable of delivering to customers whenever you need to.

Edit:

I'm probably missing tons of other ideas behind devops.
- Automation
- Ephemeral systems
- Small feedback cycles
- etc

But for another time...



